CREDITS:0
---
LECTURER/S:Dr.G.Fuller,Dr.A.Ziljstra,Dr.J.Lu
---
PREREQ:N/A
---
FOLLOWUP:N/A
---
CLASSES:24 lectures in S4
---
ASSESMENT:
  For the full course unit (PHYS20811)
  Assessed Vacation Essay and presentation  50%
  Managing My Future  20%
  Online Professional Ethics for Physicists module  15%
  Online Equality and Diversity Awareness module 15%
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1. Better communicate, both orally and in writing, with a scientific audience.
2. Better communicate, both orally and in writing, with a non-scientific audience.
3. Appreciate the issues involved in working within a group.
4. More successfully apply for graduate jobs and careers.
5. Better understand ethical issues associated with their work.
6. Better appreciate equality and diversity issues.
---
TXTBOOKS:
None
---
SYLLABUS:Written Communication
a) By week 1 of semester 3 all students will be required to complete a short module on Scientific Writing in Blackboard. The topics include Sentence Structure and Punctuation, Word Choice and Grammar, Academic Style, Conventions and Characteristics, Improving Readability, Writing Paragraphs, Critical Reading, Summarising, Paraphrasing and Referencing, Phraseological and Rhetorical Awareness, Review and Revision, and The Process of Writing.

b) Vacation Essay
Submission of an essay of between 1500 and 1800 words on a physics-related subject selected from a list or otherwise approved by the 1st Year Tutor. The deadline for submission is during Week 1 of Semester 3. The exact deadline is announced at the end of Semester 2. The essay should convey knowledge and understanding of a physics-related topic in a measured but informal way at a level to educate and interest a fellow physics student.

Failure to complete the online module will result in a recorded mark of zero for the Vacation Essay.

1. Managing My Futures

A session looking at employability skills is scheduled on Tuesday 25th September 2018. 

2. Ethics
Students will be required to complete an online module “Professional Ethics for Physicists” covering plagiarism (briefly) and academic good practice, honesty and data integrity, ethical issues for physicists (for example the potential sociological or environmental impact of new technologies weapons, nuclear power, nuclear weapons) and whistle-blowing.

3. Equality and Diversity Awareness
Students will be required to complete online modules addressing equality and diversity issues.
---

