CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Dr. N. Jackson
---
PREREQ:PHYS20141, PHYS20171
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS30611, PHYS40612, PHYS46111
---
CLASSES:24 lectures in S4
---
ASSESMENT:Tutorial work and attendance (5%)
1 hour 30 minutes examination in May/June (95%)
---
AIMS:On successful completion students will be able to:
1. Use complex notation competently for wave phenomena
2. Solve problems which require the use of wave representations of electric and magnetic fields in
propagating electromagnetic waves
3. Analyse simple examples of interference and diffraction phenomena
4. Explain the principles of operation of, a range of equipment used in modern optics, notably the Michelson
interferometer and Fabry-Perot etalon
5.
Apply the physics processes involved in producing laser radiation to solve simple problems
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Hecht, E., Optics, (Addison Wesley)
Smith, F.G. & King, T.A. Optics and Photonics - An Introduction (Wiley)
Further Reading
Lipson, S.G., Lipson, H.S. & Tannhauser, D.S., Optical Physics, (Cambridge)
Jenkins, F.A. & White, H.E., Fundamentals of Optics, (McGraw Hill)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Electromagnetism
(2 lectures)
Recap of Maxwell’s equations and the wave equation in a dielectric
General solutions to the wave equation
Particular solutions to the wave equation: plane & spherical waves
Wavefronts, rays, Poynting vector; the time-averaged optical field
Optical spectra – temporal and spatial frequencies
Huygens’ wavelets and Fermat’s principle. Example: gravitational lenses
2.
Polarization
(5 lectures)
Recap of polarization states; unpolarized and partially polarized light
Polarization by reflection and scattering; Brewster’s angle.
Polaroid and Malus’ law
Optical anisotropy; wave equation in anisotropic media; birefringence; o- and e-rays; double refraction
Polarizing beamsplitters and waveplates; Faraday rotators
3.
Interference
(6 lectures)
Conditions for interference; temporal and spatial coherence
Young’s slits; Lloyd’s mirror; multiple slits. Extended sources, outline of radio interferometry.
The Michelson interferometer, LIGO. Fourier transform spectroscopy
Thin films; Fabry-Perot etalon: resolution, FSR and finesse.
4.
Diffraction
(6 lectures)
Fraunhofer diffraction: single and double slit, rectangular and circular apertures,
resolution of optical instruments
Fraunhofer diffraction as a Fourier transform; convolution
The diffraction grating and spectrometers
Fresnel diffraction: circular obstacles and half-period zones; straight edges
5.
Lasers
(4 lectures)
Spontaneous and stimulated emission; absorption; Einstein coefficients
Rate equations; population inversion and optical gain
Optical cavities
Steady state operation; threshold and efficiency
An example laser system: Nd:YAG
---

