CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Prof. T. Wyatt
---
PREREQ:PHYS20141, PHYS20401 (useful but not essential)
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS40481, PHYS40682, PHYS40771, PHYS40772
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S6
---
ASSESMENT:1 hour 30 minutes examination in January
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1.
demonstrate an understanding of the use of scalar and vector potentials and of gauge
invariance.
2. demonstrate the compatibility of electrodynamics and special relativity.
3. know and use methods of solution of Poisson's equation and the inhomogeneous wave
equation.
4. know and use principles of Lorentz covariant formalism and tensor analysis.
5. distinguish between radiation fields and other electromagnetic fields.
6.Calculate the radiated power produced by accelerating charges.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Heald, M.A. & Marion, J.B. Classical Electromagnetic Radiation, (Academic Press,
London 1995)
Griffiths, D.J., Introduction to Electrodynamics (Benjamin Cummings; 3rd edition (December 30,
1998))
Supplementary reading
Feynman, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol II (Addison Wesley, 1964)
Jackson, J.D., Classical Electrodynamics, (John Wiley & Sons, 3rd edition 1999)
Schwartz, M., Principles of Electrodynamics, (Dover Publications, 1972)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Linear Algebra
(1 lecture)
Revision of vectors and matrices; basis sets and components. Index notation and summation
convention. Rotational invariance and cartesian tensors.
2.
Electromagnetic Field Equations
(7 lectures)
Maxwell's equations and wave solutions. Definition of scalar and vector potential. Poisson's
equation and electro- and magnetostatics; multipole expansions. Electrodynamics in Lorentz
Gauge; the inhomogeneous wave equation and the retarded time.
3.
Accelerating Charges
(6 lectures)
Lienard-Wiechert potentials; Power radiated from an arbitrarily moving charge. Larmor’s power
formula; synchrotron radiation; bremsstrahlung.
4.
Harmonically Varying Sources
(2 lectures)
Multipole radiation: electric (Hertzian) and magnetic dipole radiation; slow-down of pulsars.
Rayleigh and Thomson scattering.
5.
Electromagnetism and Relativity
(8 lectures)
Four vectors and tensors; Covariant and contravariant formalism of Lorentz transformations;
relativistic dynamics. Consistency of Maxwell's equations and relativity. Electromagnetic field
tensor and electrodynamics in covariant form.
---

