CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Prof. A. Juel
---
PREREQ:PHYS10101, PHYS10302, PHYS10372, PHYS20171
---
FOLLOWUP:None
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S5.
---
ASSESMENT:1 hour 30 minutes examination in January.
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1.
explore the basic concepts of nonlinear dynamics using the 'simple' pendulum and adaptations
of it.
2. analyse simple one and two-dimensional nonlinear systems.
3. identify attractors of those nonlinear systems, and to characterise their stability.
4. understand and apply the basic numerical methods relevant for nonlinear systems.
5.
demonstrate an understanding of what constitutes chaotic behaviour and explain why this
imposes limits on predictability.
6. survey applications of the ideas in several areas of physics, and in other disciplines
7. describe the concept of a fractal and explain the idea of a non-integer dimension.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Strogatz, S.H. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, (Addison Wesley 1994).
Useful references
Baker, G.L. & Gollub, J.P. Chaotic Dynamics: An Introduction, (CUP 1996),
Second edition
Jordan, D.W. & Smith, P. Nonlinear Ordinary Differential Equations, (OUP 1999), Third edition
Supplementary reading
Gleick, J. Chaos: Making a New Science, (Heinmann 1998)
Stewart, I. Does God play Dice? The Mathematics of Chaos, (Penguin 1990)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Introduction - overview of the course introducing some of the basic ideas.
(1 lecture)
General introduction and motivation; examples of linearity and nonlinearity in physics and the
other sciences; modelling systems using iterated maps or differential equations.
2.
General features of dynamical systems - the structures that may arise in the analysis of
ordinary differential equations.
(10 lectures)
Systems of differential equations with examples; control parameters; fixed points and their
stability; phase space; linear stability analysis; numerical methods for nonlinear systems;
properties of limit cycles; nonlinear oscillators and their applications; the impossibility of chaos
in the phase plane; bifurcations: their classification and physical examples; spatial systems,
pattern formation and the Turing mechanism; strange attractors and chaotic behaviour.
3.
The logistic map - period doubling and chaos in a simple iterated map.
(4 lectures)
Linear and quadratic maps; graphical analysis of the logistic map; linear stability analysis and
the existence of 2-cycles; numerical analysis of the logistic map; universality and the
Feigenbaum numbers; chaotic behaviour and the determination of the Lyapunov exponent;
other examples of iterated maps.
4.
Fractals - complex geometrical objects of which strange attractors are examples.
(4 lectures)
How long is the coastline of Britain? Artificial fractals: the Cantor set and von Koch curve; fractal
dimensions; iterations of the complex plane and the Mandelbrot set; how fractals arise in the
description of dynamical systems.
5.
Further aspects of chaotic dynamics - exploring the basic ingredients of chaos.
(3 lectures)
Fractal structures in simple maps; how strange attractors come about; the evolution of phase
space volumes in chaotic and non-chaotic systems; mixing and information entropy.
---

