CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Lab Tutor: Dr. P. Parkinson
---
PREREQ:PHYS20101, PHYS20141, PHYS20161, PHYS20171,
PHYS20252, PHYS20312, PHYS20352
---
FOLLOWUP:4th year projects or postgraduate research.
---
CLASSES:Laboratory work is divided into four blocks, A and B in S5 and C and D in S6. Each block spans six
weeks and is worth 10 credits. Lab blocks comprise 8 full days in the lab on Tuesdays and Thursdays,
9.00am to 5.00pm, over four weeks, followed by an assessment in the fifth week and a written
report completed during weeks five and six.
MPhys students usually perform one experiment in each semester (Block A or B + Block C or D). BSc
students will usually perform either two experiments in S5, and a dissertation (PHYS30880) during
S6, or dissertation and experiment in S5 and an experiment in S6.
Students in some degree programmes (such as Physics with Theoretical Physics) take only one
experimental block, as indicated on the programme pages.
Students may express a preference as to which blocks they take. However, the final choice of blocks
for each student will be made by the Laboratory Tutor for logistic reasons.Experiments last 12 full days: 8 days of experimental work plus 4 days for preparing presentations,
and for assessment. Experiments will be assigned beforehand by the Laboratory Tutor on the basis
of student requests.
Students will usually work in pairs on their experiment and will be given a great deal of freedom in
the way they perform the experiments, but demonstrators will discuss the experiments with them at
the beginning and will be available to assist and advise at all stages. A minimum level of attendance
is mandatory, as described in more detail on the blackboard pages.
---
ASSESMENT:Assessment comprises of two components. The first is through a presentation and interview on
completion of each experiment. The presentation is made jointly by the student pair. This
component will take into account the following: experimental skill and record keeping, the oral
presentation, understanding of the relevant physics, quality of the results and the analysis,
originality and initiative. The second component of assessment is through written reports of each
experiment. Independent written reports are completed individually by each student and are
assessed individually. Each written account must be in word-processed form with strict length limits.
The credit split for the interview/report is 70/30. Dates for interviews and deadlines for written
reports will be published well in advance and late penalties will apply.
---
AIMS:N/A
---
TXTBOOKS:N/A
---
SYLLABUS:N/A
---

