CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Prof. B. Cox & Prof. J. Forshaw
---
PREREQ:A-Level Physics and Mathematics
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS10672, PHYS20101 and PHYS20602
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S1
---
ASSESMENT:Tutorial work and attendance (5%)
Mid-semester test (10%)
1 hour 30 minutes examination in January (85%)
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1. Define the notion of an inertial frame and the concept of an observer.
2. State the principles of Special Relativity and use them to derive time dilation and length contraction.
3. Perform calculations using the Lorentz transformation formulae.
4. Define relativistic energy and momentum, and use these to solve problems in mechanics.
5. Perform calculations using four-vectors.
6.
Use the ideas of wave-particle duality and the uncertainty principle to solve problems in quantum
mechanics.
7.
Perform calculations using the quantum wave function of a particle moving in one dimension, including
making use of the momentum operator.
8.
Use the Bohr formula to calculate energies and wavelengths in the context of atomic hydrogen.

---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended text
Forshaw, J. R. & Smith, G, Dynamics & Relativity (John Wiley & Sons)
Young, H. D. & Freedman, R.A., University Physics (Addison-Wesley)
Supplementary texts
Cox, B. E. & Forshaw, J. R. Why does E=mc 2 ? (and why should we care?) (Da Capo)
Cox, B. E. & Forshaw, J. R. The Quantum Universe (Allen Lane)
Rindler, W. Relativity: Special, General & Cosmological (Oxford)
---
SYLLABUS:
1.
Relativity
Galilean relativity, inertial frames and the concept of an observer.
The principles of Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity
Lorentz transformations: time dilations and length contraction.
Velocity transformations and the Doppler effect.
Spacetime and four-vectors.
Energy and momentum with applications in particle and nuclear physics.
2.
Quantum Physics
Basic properties of atoms and molecules. Atomic units. Avogadro’s number.
The wavefunction and the role of probability.
Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle and the de Broglie relation.
The momentum operator and the time-independent Schrödinger equation: the infinite square well.
Applications in atomic, nuclear and particle physics: energy levels and spectra and lifetimes.
---

