CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Dr.T.Wyatt
---
PREREQ:PHYS10101, PHYS10302, PHYS10372
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS30441, PHYS30201, PHYS40202, PHYS40771, PHYS40992
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S3
---
ASSESMENT:1 hour 30 minutes examination in January
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1.
Choose an appropriate set of generalised coordinates to describe a dynamical system and obtain its
Lagrangian in terms of those coordinates and the associated 'velocities'. Derive and solve the
corresponding equations of motion. Treat small oscillations as an eigenvalue problem.
2. Apply a variational principle to solve simple problems involving constraints.
3. Appreciate symmetries and how they manifest themselves in terms of constants of the motion.
4. Obtain generalised momenta and thus the Hamiltonian of a dynamical system. Derive and solve
the equations of motion in Hamiltonian form.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Kibble, T.W.B. & Berkshire, F.H. Classical Mechanics, 5th edition (Longman)
Goldstein, H., Poole, C. & Safko, J. Classical Mechanics, 3rd edition (Addison-Wesley)
Landau, L.D. and Lifshiftz, E.M. Mechanics, 3 rd edition (Pergamon Press)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Introduction
Review of Newtonian mechanics: internal forces, external forces, forces of constraint. Rotational
problems and polar coordinates.
Conservation laws and conservative systems.
Partial derivatives.
2.
Lagrangian Dynamics
The energy method plus other conservation laws.
The Lagrangian and Lagrange’s equation.
Small oscillations and normal modes.
3.
Calculus of Variations
Functional minimization.
The Euler-Lagrange equations.
Constrained variation.
Hamilton’s principle of least action.
Lagrangian dynamics.
4.
The Hamiltonian Formalism
Legendre transformations.
Generalized momenta, the Hamiltonian and Hamilton's equations.
Phase space. Liouville’s theorem
5.
Symmetries and Conservation Laws
Generators of transformations.
Poisson brackets.
Symmetries of the Lagrangian produce constants of motion. Noether’s theorem.
6.
Normal Modes from Matrices
Normal modes from symmetries.
Review of mathematics of matrices: eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Diagonalizing a matrix using its eigenvectors.
Small oscillations as eigenvalue problems.
10. Special Topics
Lagrangian for charged particle moving in electric and magnetic fields.
Continuous systems: the Lagrangian Density.
---

