CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Dr. P. Campbell
---
PREREQ:PHYS10071, PHYS10342, PHYS10372
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS20312, PHYS30141, PHYS30441
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S3
---
ASSESMENT:Tutorial work and attendance (5%)
1 hour 30 minutes examination in January (95%)
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1.
know and demonstrate an understanding of Maxwell's equations and their derivation from the
empirical laws of electromagnetism.
2.
use the fundamental laws of electromagnetism to solve simple problems of electrostatics, magnetostatics
and electromagnetic induction in a vacuum.
3.
understand how to formulate Maxwells laws in the presence of simple materials and solve simple
problems involving them.
434.
know and understand the electromagnetic boundary conditions which apply at the interface between
two simple media, and to use them to solve simple problems.
5.
demonstrate understanding of the properties of plane electromagnetic waves in a vacuum and in simple
media and to be able to derive these properties from Maxwell's equations.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Grant, I.S. & Phillips, W.R. Electromagnetism (2nd ed.) (Wiley)
Useful references
Bleaney, B.I. & Bleaney B. Electricity & Magnetism (3 rd ed.) (Oxford Uni. Press)
Lorrain & Corson, Electromagnetic Fields and Waves (3 rd ed.) (W.H. Freeman & Co.)
Duffin, W.J. Electricity and Magnetism (4 th ed.) (Duffin, previous eds. McGraw-Hill)
Jackson, J.D. Classical Electrodynamics (3 rd ed.) (Wiley)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Mathematical Preliminaries
(2 lectures)
Revision of Vector Calculus; Dirac δ-function and point particles; Laplace’s & Poisson’s equations and their
uniqueness theorem.
2.
Maxwells equations in a vacuum
(7 lectures)
Continuity equation; Integral forms of Maxwell’s equations; Differential forms of Maxwell’s equations;
Potential formulation; Electrostatics and magnetostatics as the time independent limit; Calculation of
field configurations; Electric and magnetic dipoles; Connections between electromagnetism and special
relativity.
3.
Electromagnetic effects in simple materials
(8 lectures)
Conductors: mechanisms for conduction; the method of images and the motion of particles near a
conductor. Dielectrics: capacitance, relative permittivity; polarization & electric susceptibility; mechanism
for polarization; electrostatics in a dielectric; Interfaces between dielectrics. Magnetism: inductance &
permeability;
magnetization
&
magnetic
susceptibility;
diamagnetism
and
paramagnetism;
magnetostatics. Ferromagnetism: ideal ferromagnets; hysteresis.
4.
Electromagnetic waves
(5 lectures)
Maxwell’s equations in free space; Plane waves; Wave solutions for E & B fields; Poynting vector,
irradiance & radiation pressure; Polarization of EM waves; Reflection of EM waves at a perfect conductor;
EM waves in the presences of a current; EM waves in a dielectric.
---

