CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Dr. M. Hughes
---
PREREQ:A-level Physics, PHYS10071
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS20141, PHYS30141, PHYS30441
---
CLASSES:24 lectures plus workshops in S2
---
ASSESMENT:Tutorial work and attendance (5%)
1 hour 30 minutes examination in May/June (95%)
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1. describe the electric field and potential, and related concepts, for stationary charges.
2. calculate electrostatic properties of simple charge distributions using Coulomb’s law,
Gauss’s law and electric potential.
3.
describe the magnetic field for steady currents and moving charges.
4. calculate magnetic properties of simple current distributions using Biot-Savart and Ampere’s laws.
5. describe electromagnetic induction and related concepts, and make calculations using
Faraday and Lenz’s laws.
6.
describe the basic physical content of Maxwell’s laws in integral form.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Grant, I. S. & Phillips, W. R. Elements of Physics (OUP)
Halliday, Resnick, Walker, Fundamentals of Physics (Wiley)
Tipler, P. A., Physics for Scientists and Engineers (Freeman)
Young, H. D. & Freedman, R. A. University Physics (Addison-Wesley)
Supplementary and Further Reading (See comments in lectures)
Dobbs, E. R. Basic Electromagnetism (Chapman-Hall)
Duffin, W. J. Electricity and Magnetism (McGraw-Hill)
Feynman, Lectures in Physics Volume 11
Grant, I. S. & Phillips, W. R. Electromagnetism (Wiley)
Griffiths, D. J. Introduction to Electrodynamics (Wiley)
Kip, A. F. Fundamentals of Electricity and Magnetism (McGraw Hill)
Schey, H. M. Div, Grad, Curl and All That (Norton)
---
SYLLABUS:
1.
Introduction
Forces in nature; electric charge and its properties; vectors, fields, flux and circulation.
2.
Electric Fields and Stationary Charges
Coulomb’s law and superposition; electric field and potential; capacitance; electric dipoles; energy in
electric fields.
3.
Magnetic Fields and Steady Currents
Magnetic fields; Lorentz force; Biot-Savart and Ampère’s laws; magnetic dipoles.
4.
Electrodynamics
Electromotive force; electromagnetic induction; Faraday and Lenz’s laws; inductance; energy in magnetic
fields.
5.
Maxwell’s Equations
Maxwell’s fix of Ampère’s law; Maxwell’s equations in integral form.
---

