CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Prof. J. R. Forshaw
---
PREREQ:PHYS20352
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS40352, PHYS40451, PHYS40752
---
CLASSES:22 lectures in S5
---
ASSESMENT:1 hour 30 minutes examination in January
---
AIMS:On completion successful students will be able to:
1.
demonstrate an understanding of the implications of particle indistinguishability for the
properties of systems of non-interacting particles.
2.
write down the Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac distribution functions and apply them to
calculate the properties of ideal Bose and Fermi gases.
3.
compare and contrast the properties of the ideal Bose gas with those of real Bose systems, in
particular black body radiation, phonons in solids.
4.
compare and contrast the properties of the ideal Fermi gas with those of real Fermi systems, in
particular electrons in metals.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts
Most of the course material at the appropriate level can be found in:
Bowley, R. & Sanchez, M. Introductory Statistical Mechanics, (Oxford)
Kittel, D. & Kroemer, H. Thermal Physics, (Freeman)
Mandl, F. Statistical Physics, (Wiley)
Hook, J.R. and Hall, H.E, Solid State Physics, (Wiley)
---
SYLLABUS:1.
Introduction to ideal quantum gas
Single particle states, k-space, density of states.
The classical limit; partition functions, pressure, entropy, chemical potential.
2.
Indistinguishability
Bosons, fermions
Gibbs distribution; meaning of chemical potential; derivation of Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein
distribution functions.
3.
The ideal Fermi gas
Fermi sphere, Fermi wave number, Fermi energy, Fermi temperature, Fermi velocity.
Free electron theory of metals; pressure.
Graphene properties. Calculation of electron and hole concentrations in graphene
4. The ideal Bose gas
Bose-Einstein condensation; liquid 4 He.
5.
Black body radiation
Planck's radiation law; photons.
Internal energy, pressure and entropy of photon gas; Wien's law; Stefan's law.
6.
Lattice vibrations of solids
Einstein theory of heat capacity; phonons.
Debye theory of heat capacity.
---

