CREDITS:10
---
LECTURER/S:Prof. W. Flavell
---
PREREQ:PHYS20101, PHYS10302, PHYS10352, PHYS10372
---
FOLLOWUP:PHYS30151, PHYS40352, PHYS40451, PHYS40712, PHYS40752
---
CLASSES:24 lectures in S4
---
ASSESMENT:Tutorial work and attendance (5%)
1 hour 30 minutes examination in May/June (95%)
---
AIMS:On completion, successful students will be able to:
1. Describe how wave motion in periodic structures leads to an understanding of the temperature
dependence of specific heat, and calculate the phonon dispersion relation for a chain of atoms;
2. Explain how electron wave functions and energies are changed by the presence of the periodic crystal
potential;
3. Demonstrate how the electrical properties of metals, insulators and semiconductors are related to their
electronic structure;
4. Explain how simple semiconductor devices (such as the p-n junction) work.
---
TXTBOOKS:Recommended texts:
Eisberg, R.M. & Resnick, R. Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles (Wiley)
De Podesta, M. Understanding the Properties of Matter, 2 nd ed (Taylor & Francis)
Hook, J.R. & Hall, H.E. Solid State Physics, 2/e (Wiley)
---
SYLLABUS:1
Molecules
(2 lectures)
Molecular orbital theory applied to covalent bonding. H 2+ ion. Hydrogen molecule.
2
Cyrstal Bonding & Structure
(3 lectures)
Van der Waals, ionic, covalent and metallic bonding and their relation to crystal structure. Lattice, basis
and unit cell. Some common 2D and 3D crystal structures. Diffraction of waves by a crystal, Bragg’s Law.
3
Lattice vibrations
(4 lectures)
Einstein model of specific heat. Vibrations of a one-dimensional chain of atoms. Diatomic chain; optical
and acoustic modes. Extension to three dimensions; the [first] Brillouin zone; transverse and longitudinal
modes. Quantized lattice vibrations [phonons]; crystal momentum of phonons. Debye model of specific
heat.
4
Electrons in solids
(5 lectures)
Effects of exchange antisymmetry for electrons in solids at zero temperature and low temperatures. Free-
electron model of a metal; states of free electrons; density of states and Fermi surface; the metallic bond.
The Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Weidemann-Franz Law. Electrical and thermal conductivity:
scattering of electrons from crystal defects and phonons. Quantum description of electronic heat
capacity.
5
Interaction of electrons with the crystal lattice
(3 lectures)
Wave functions of electrons in a one-dimensional crystal; crystal momentum. Modification of free-
electron dispersion relation; energy bands and band gaps. Classification of solids by their electrical
properties at zero temperature: metals and insulators. Semi-classical dynamics of electrons; effective
mass; holes. Hall effect.
6
Semiconductors
(4 lectures)
Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, donors and acceptors, p-n junction, light emitting diode, solar cell,
quantum dots.
7
Graphene
(1 lecture)
Introduction to the band structure and physical properties of graphene.
---

